Jane Austen was an English novelist. 
She wrote many books of romantic fiction about the gentry. 
Her works made her one of the most famous and beloved writers in English literature. 
She is one of the great masters of the English novel. 
Austen's works criticized sentimental novels in the late 18th century, and are part of the change to nineteenth-century realism. 
She wrote about typical people in everyday life. 
This gave the English novel its first distinctly modern character. 
Austen's stories are often comic, but they also show how women depended on marriage for social standing and economic security.
Her works are also about moral problems. 
Jane Austen was born on 16 December 1775 at Steventon, near Basingstoke. 
Educated mostly by her father and older brothers, and also by her own reading, she lived with her family at Steventon. 
They moved to Bath when her father retired in 1801. 
After he died in 1805, she moved around with her mother. 
In 1809, they settled in Chawton, near Alton, Hampshire. 
In May 1817 she moved to Winchester to be near her doctor. 
She died there on 18 July 1817. 
Jane Austen was very modest about her own genius. 
She once famously described her work as "the little bit (two Inches wide) of Ivory, on which I work with so fine a brush, as produces little effect after much labor". 
When she was a girl she wrote stories. 
Her works were printed only after much revision. 
Only four of her novels were printed while she was alive. 
They were Sense and Sensibility, Pride and Prejudice, Mansfield Park and Emma. 
Two other novels, Northanger Abbey and Persuasion, were printed in 1817 with a biographical notice by her brother, Henry Austen. 
Persuasion was written shortly before her death. 
She also wrote two earlier works, Lady Susan, and an unfinished novel, The Watsons. 
She had been working on a new novel, Sanditon, but she died before she could finish it. 
She is now a well known great writer. 
Biographical facts about Jane Austen are "famously scarce". 
Austen had a large family. 
She had six brothers — James, George, Edward, Henry Thomas, Francis William, Charles John — and one sister, Cassandra Elizabeth, who died without marrying. 
Jane deeply loved Cassandra, and they were both best friends. 
Of her brothers, Austen was most close to Henry, who helped spread and influence her writing. 
George was almost ten years older than Jane. 
He suffered from fits and was not able to develop normally. 
He may also have been deaf and mute. 
Jane knew sign language and could have communicated with him. 
Charles and Frank served in the navy. 
Edward was adopted by his fourth cousin, Thomas Knight. 
He became "Edward Knight" instead of Edward Austen in 1812. 
Austen was born on 16 December 1775 at Steventon rectory. 
She was christened at home and then, as the Book of Common Prayer directs, brought to church for the baptism to be certified in public on 5 April 1776. 
A few months after she was born, her mother hired a woman named Elizabeth Littlewood to nurse her. 
Littlewood took care of Austen for about a year. 
According to family tradition, Jane and Cassandra were sent to Oxford to be educated by Mrs. Ann Crawley in 1783. 
They moved with her to Southampton later in the year. 
Both girls caught typhus and Jane almost died. 
After that, Austen was educated at home until she went to boarding school with Cassandra early in 1785. 
She learned some French, spelling, needlework, dancing, music, and probably drama. 
In the winter of 1786, Jane and Cassandra went back home. 
Austen also learned much by reading books. 
Her father and brothers helped choose the books she read. 
George Austen seemed to have let his daughters read the books in his large library freely. 
He also allowed Austen's experiments in writing, and gave her costly paper and other writing materials. 
Jane Austen and her family also enjoyed acting out plays privately. 
Most of the plays were comedies. 
This might have been a way for Austen's comedic and satirical talents to develop. 
Jane Austen started to feel increasingly unwell during 1816, which was the year when her novel 'Persuasion' was published. 
On 24 May 1817, she moved to Winchester in search for a cure to her illness. 
She died on 18 July 1817, aged 41. 
Although there is no conclusive evidence to prove the cause of her death, it seems likely that it was Addison's disease that killed her. 
She was buried in Winchester Cathedral on 24 July 1817.