Frances Burney, also known as Fanny Burney and later Madame d'Arblay, was an English satirical novelist, diarist and playwright. 
Born in Lynn Regis, now King's Lynn, England, on 13 June 1752, to the musician Dr Charles Burney and his first wife, Esther Sleepe Burney, she was the third of her mother's six children. 
She began her "scribblings" at the age of ten. In 1786–1790 she held an unusual courtier appointment as "Keeper of the Robes" to Charlotte of Mecklenburg-Strelitz, George III's queen. 
In 1793, aged 41, she married a French exile, General Alexandre D'Arblay. Their only son Alexander was born in 1794. 
After a long writing career, and travels in which warfare stranded her in France for over ten years, she settled in Bath, England, where she died on 6 January 1840. 
The first of her four novels, Evelina, was the most successful and remains the most highly regarded. Most of her plays were not performed in her lifetime. 
She wrote a memoir of her father and many letters and journals, which have been gradually published since 1889. 
Frances Burney was a novelist, diarist and playwright. In all, she wrote four novels, eight plays, one biography and twenty-five volumes of journals and letters. 
She has gained critical respect in her own right, but she also foreshadowed such novelists of manners with a satirical bent as Jane Austen and William Makepeace Thackeray.
She published her first novel, Evelina, anonymously in 1778. During that period, novel reading was frowned upon as something young women of a certain social status should not do, while novel writing was out of the question.
Burney feared that her father would discover what she called her "scribblings". When she published Evelina anonymously, she only told her siblings and two trusted aunts. 
Eventually her father read the novel and guessed that Burney was its author. News of her identity spread. The novel brought Burney almost immediate fame with its unique narrative and comic strengths. 
She followed it with Cecilia in 1782, Camilla in 1796 and The Wanderer in 1814. All Burney's novels explore the lives of English aristocrats and satirise their social pretensions and personal foibles, with an eye to larger questions such as the politics of female identity.
With one exception, Burney never succeeded in having her plays performed, largely due to objections from her father, who thought that publicity from such an effort would be damaging to her reputation. 
The exception was Edwy and Elgiva, which unfortunately was not well received by the public and closed after the first night's performance. Although her novels were hugely popular during her lifetime, Burney's reputation as a writer of fiction suffered after her death at the hands of biographers and critics, who felt that the extensive diaries, published posthumously in 1842–1846, offer a more interesting and accurate portrait of 18th-century life. 
Today critics are returning to her novels and plays with renewed interest in her outlook on the social lives and struggles of women in a predominantly male-oriented culture. 
Scholars continue to value Burney's diaries as well, for their candid depictions of English society. Through her whole writing career, Burney's talent for satirical caricature was widely acknowledged: figures such as Dr Samuel Johnson, Edmund Burke, Hester Thrale and David Garrick were among her admirers. 
Her early novels were read and enjoyed by Jane Austen, whose own title Pride and Prejudice derives from the final pages of Cecilia. Thackeray is said to have drawn on the first-person account of the Battle of Waterloo recorded in her diaries while writing his Vanity Fair.
Burney's early career was strongly affected by her relations with her father and the critical attentions of a family friend, Samuel Crisp. Both encouraged her writing, but used their influence in a critical fashion, dissuading her from publishing or performing her dramatic comedies, as they saw the genre as inappropriate for a lady. Many feminist critics have since seen her as an author whose natural talent for satire was somewhat stifled by such social pressures on female authors.[4] Burney persisted despite the setbacks. When her comedies were poorly received, she returned to novel writing, and later tried her hand at tragedy. She supported both herself and her family on the proceeds of her later novels, Camilla and The Wanderer. 
The first entry in Frances Burney's journal was dated 27 March 1768 and addressed to "Nobody". The journal itself was to extend over 72 years.
A talented storyteller with a strong sense of character, Burney kept the journal-diary as a form of correspondence with family and friends, recounting life events and her observations of them.
The diary contains a record of her extensive reading in her father's library, as well as the visits and behaviour of noted personalities in the arts who came to their home. 
Frances and her sister Susanna were particularly close, and Frances continued to send journal-letters to her throughout her adult life. Burney was 15 when her father remarried in 1767.
Her diary entries suggest that she had begun to feel pressure to abandon her writing as something "unladylike" that "might vex Mrs. Allen."
Feeling that she had transgressed, that same year she burnt her first manuscript, The History of Caroline Evelyn, which she had written in secret.
Despite this repudiation, Frances recorded in her diary an account of the emotions that led up to that dramatic act.
She eventually recouped some of the effort by using it as a foundation for her first novel, Evelina, which follows the life of the fictional Caroline Evelyn's daughter.
In keeping with Burney's sense of propriety, she savagely edited earlier parts of her diaries in later life, destroying much of the material.
Editors Lars Troide and Joyce Hemlow recovered some of this obscured material while researching their late-20th-century editions of the journals and letters. 
Burney's Evelina or the History of a Young Lady's Entrance into the World was published anonymously in 1778 without her father's knowledge or permission, by Thomas Lowndes, who voiced an interest after reading its first volume and agreed to publish it upon receipt of the finished work.
The novel had been rejected by a previous publisher, Robert Dodsley, who declined to print an anonymous work. Burney, who worked as her father's amanuensis, had copied the manuscript in a "disguised hand" to prevent any identification of the book with the Burneys, thinking that her own handwriting might be recognised by a publisher.
Burney's second attempt to publish it involved the collusion of her eldest brother James, who posed as its author to Lowndes. Inexperienced at negotiating with a publisher, he only extracted twenty guineas as payment for the manuscript.
The novel was a critical success, receiving praise from respected persons, including the statesman Edmund Burke and the literary critic Dr Johnson. 
It was admired for its comic view of wealthy English society and realistic portrayal of working-class London dialects.
It is known today as a satire. It was even discussed by characters in another epistolary novel of the period: Elizabeth Blower's George Bateman.
Burney's father read public reviews of it before learning that the author was his daughter. Although the act of publication was radical for its time, he was impressed by the favourable reactions and largely supported her.
He certainly saw social advantages in having a successful writer in the family and was pleased by the recognition Frances gained through her work.
Written in epistolary form just as this was reaching its height of popularity, Evelina portrays the English upper middle class through a 17-year-old woman who has reached marriageable age.
It was a Bildungsroman ahead of its time. Evelina pushed boundaries, for female protagonists were still "relatively rare" in that genre.
Comic and witty, it is ultimately a satire of the oppressive masculine values that shaped a young woman's life in the 18th century, and of other forms of social hypocrisy.
Encyclopædia Britannica calls it a "landmark in the development of the novel of manners". In choosing to narrate the novel through letters written by the protagonist, Burney made use of her own writing experience.
This course has won praise from critics past and present, for the direct access it provides to events and characters, and the narrative sophistication it demonstrates in linking the roles of narrator and heroine. 
The authors of Women in World History argue that she identifies difficulties faced by women in the 18th century, especially those on questions of romance and marriage.
She is seen as a "shrewd observer of her times and a clever recorder of its charms and its follies". What critics have consistently found interesting in her writing is the introduction and careful treatment of a female protagonist, complete with character flaws, "who must make her way in a hostile world."
These are recognisable also as features of Jane Austen's writing, and show Burney's influence on her work. Furthermore, she sought to put to use the epistolary form espoused periodically by Burney, as seen in Lady Susan and to a lesser extent Pride and Prejudice. 
As a testament to its popularity, the novel went through four immediate editions.
